---
layout: post
title:  "Donkey Trail Trailhead"
date:   2023-10-09
categories: [hiking, trail, hawaii, usa, gönguleið]
tags: [donkey-trail-trailhead, onomea-trail, big-island]
---

Donkey Trail is a beautiful short hike on the Hilo side of Big Island Hawai'i.
It is only 0.2 mi. (0.4 km) long, maybe a 20 min. hike if you go slowly and you
will want to go slowly because there is so much to see in this short hike, all
kinds of flora. On an autumn October day, the hike was quite humid and had a
pleasant fruity smell. What kind exactly? I couldn't say.

![Alt]({{ site.url }}/assets/Donkey_trail_beginning_of_trail.JPG "The beginning
of Donkey Trail")

## Starting the hike

It is reached on the scenic route of Old Mamalahoe Hwy, north of and just past
the parking lot entrance to the Hawai'i Tropical Botanical Gardens is the start
of the trailhead. It is marked with a sign and an small dirt patch. This dirt
patch can fit two cars comfortably. Google Maps has pretty decent directions up
until the botanical gardens. The Hawaiian government also has [a webpage with
more information about the trail][hawaiitrails], also linked via the QR code in
the trailhead sign below.

![Alt]({{ site.url }}/assets/Donkey_trail_trailhead_sign.JPG "Trailhead sign
with detailed information about the hike")

![Alt]({{ site.url }}/assets/Donkey_trail_parking_spot.JPG "The parking spot by
the trailhead")

If you want a slightly longer hike, you can do the Onomea Bay Trail which also
connects and contains the Donkey Trail Trailhead. It has a trailhead sign a
little south of the botanical gardens. There are also brown patches of dirt to
park on near this trailhead. There are more parking spots here but they are
narrower. 

When parking, make sure your car is completely off of the road, on the dirt
patch, as to not inconvenience other drivers as this is a narrow windy road.
You may also be fined if any part of your car is on the road while parked.

## Preparation

There are mosquitos. So I advise putting on bug repellant or to wear long
sleeves and pants. If you don't, you can be like me and get over ten bug bites
from this hike alone.

This is an easy trail so you can attempt it with regular exercise shoes or even
clogs on a dry day. On a rainy day, shoes with a bit more traction are
recommended due to the incline on this trail.

## Donkey Trail

The trail has roots sticking out all over so I recommend treading with caution.
There are also some loose mossy rocks, which can be a trip hazard.

![Alt]({{ site.url }}/assets/Donkey_trail_mossy_roots_and_berries.JPG "Mossy
roots and berries on the trail")

If you look carefully, you may see small dark crabs skitter on the rocks
by the shore.

![Alt]({{ site.url }}/assets/Donkey_trail_trail_back_waves.GIF "Animated GIF of
waves splashing the trail")

The trail ends with an outcropping of lava rocks into the ocean. You can sit on
these rocks for a bit to take in the view.

When you are done taking in the view, you can then take a small detour. Near
the end of the trail, is another trail which branches off to the right into a
small cove. It is indicated by signs warning of flash floods.  Within this cove
is the connection to the rest of the Onomea Bay Trail. It was hard to see the
path since it is covered up by the branches of a large tree. But it's easier to
see if you start from the Onomea side. The waters here can sometimes contain
infectious bacteria so enter the waters with caution if you have an open wound.

![Alt]({{ site.url }}/assets/Donkey_trail_small_beach_cove.JPG "Cove as seen
from the lava rock outcropping")

When you finish this hike, you can also head north to see a waterfall at Akaka
Falls. It has a parking lot and paid entry.

Here are more reviews on [AllTrails][donkey-trail].

[donkey-trail]: https://www.alltrails.com/trail/hawaii/hawaii/donkey-trail
[hawaiitrails]: https://hawaiitrails.ehawaii.gov/trails/#/trail/onomea-and-donkey-trails/31
